The Project Gutenberg eBook of East of Eden
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: East of Eden

Author: Isa Glenn

Release date: April 3, 2025 [eBook #75781]

Language: English

Original publication: Garden City, New York: Doubleday, Doran & Co, 1932

Credits: Carla Foust, Tim Lindell, David E. Brown, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This book was produced from images made available by the HathiTrust Digital Library.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EAST OF EDEN ***





EVA LITCHFIELD

was banished from Eden by either beauty or genius, whichever one chose
to consider the irrelevant factor of her character. If she herself had
known what she wanted most, she would have liked to write her novels in
a tranquil, mental world where there was no room for lovers.

She was capable of going through matrimony without experiencing with
her body the slightest nervous reaction. Her soul might be bruised and
her mind astonished, but no physical impression would have been made on
her. She was like a crystal. A blow might leave her unscratched while
the next blow might strike on the line of cleavage and shatter her.

Eva’s marriage to Nicholas Van Suydam of the Dutch Van Suydams who
inherited Manhattan and upheld the ancient family traditions with
stolid charm, was doomed to unhappiness.

Miss Glenn creates the strangely living and attractive personality of
a lovely, untouchable woman and a genius, against the background of
contemporary literary New York, a New York brilliantly sketched with
wit and a light touch of satire. In subject _East of Eden_ is a vivid
contrast to Miss Glenn’s _Transport_ and _A Short History of Julia_.




[Illustration: EAST OF EDEN]




BOOKS BY

_Isa Glenn_

  EAST OF EDEN
  A SHORT HISTORY OF JULIA
  TRANSPORT
  SOUTHERN CHARM
  LITTLE PITCHERS
  HEAT




  EAST OF EDEN

  _Isa Glenn_

  [Illustration]

  DOUBLEDAY, DORAN
  AND COMPANY, INC.
  GARDEN CITY, N. Y.
  1932




  PRINTED AT THE _Country Life Press_, GARDEN CITY, N. Y., U. S. A.

  COPYRIGHT, 1932
  BY ISA GLENN
  ALL RIGHTS RESERVED

  FIRST EDITION




THEREFORE _the LORD God sent him forth from the garden of Eden, to till
the ground from whence he was taken._

_So he drove out the man; and he placed at the east of the garden of
Eden Cherubims, and a flaming sword which turned every way, to keep the
way of the tree of life._

GENESIS iii. 23-24.




[Illustration]

CONTENTS


  PART ONE        _Page   3_

  PART TWO        _Page  83_

  PART THREE      _Page 133_

  PART FOUR       _Page 221_

  PART FIVE       _Page 281_




PART ONE




[Illustration]

I


I realized that I was sorry to be back in New York. Molly Underhill
had telephoned: “Oh, darling, I’m so remorseful that we didn’t meet
your ship! Eva Litchfield and I were going to be waiting for you with
cheers because you’re home at last, and then Eva couldn’t get away.
She’s in the last throes of a book, you know--or maybe you don’t know;
you’ve become an expatriate, haven’t you?” Gasping, lisping, gushingly
affectionate because she was speaking to me instead of talking about
me, she eventually came to the point and invited me to dine with her at
our old haunt, one of those establishments run by an Italian whose name
it would be a shame to give. There was much to hear, she assured me;
things had been popping, as they could pop only in New York. “But I’ll
tell all, in the taxi,” she promised. “Only, the drive will be short,
and the tale is long.”

In New York, the tale is always long, but one gets it in fragments
delivered between the necessary snatches of sleep and the attenuated
diet of the New Yorker determined to be slim. Molly explained that she
was at liberty to introduce me, in a way of speaking, to the city that
had so radically changed, so phenomenally grown, during my protracted
stay abroad: she had finished the proofs of a volume of her poems and,
she added, as usual when she had sojourned in the empyrean, she felt
the need of a strongly human contact. I informed her that on my own
part I had come back to write a book about the ways and mistakes of
Americans in France; one had to get out of a place in order to write a
novel about it. When conversing with Molly Underhill, the trick was to
watch her face; her expression might not harmonize with her words. I
was at a disadvantage when she drawled: “And then, my lamb, you purpose
leaving New York in order to write a book about us? Oh, you’ll get
stories out of us! You can’t conceive of the racket instituted by our
crowd; and Eva Litchfield is our pacemaker. I suspect it’s because of
an underlying discontent with her failure in the marriage line.”

Molly forced information only upon reluctant listeners. It was as if I
harboured no curiosity that I asked: “Why do you call it a failure?”

“The look in her mother-in-law’s eye,” chuckled Molly; and hung up. She
had a lip-licking chuckle. It prepared me to combat whatever position
she had taken in regard to Eva Litchfield. I did not go so far as to
decide to range myself squarely on Eva’s side, it being problematical
if a fight were raging around her or if she herself had precipitated
some squabble among her friends. This point time, and no human
reasoning, would clear up. In our crowd, one always disputed, but the
gage of battle, promptly trampled underfoot, was soon overlooked, the
war cry settled on when all was over.

The frantic American spirit of crowding into a day all that should be
spread over a week caught me up and swept me out to be lost in a sea
of controversial gossip. I found my time arranged for; I was to rush
from one engagement to another without the necessary pauses in which
to piece together my impressions of things told me. I was to lunch
with Charles Glidden the novelist, in a “quiet little place where we
can talk about Eva Litchfield’s married life.” I was to go to Sutton
Place for cocktails with Florence Quincy the short-story writer, who
would invite only a few people “so that we can talk about poor Eva’s
fiasco.” In regard to Eva Litchfield, conditions in New York had not
changed. From all sides would come allusions to her, stray information
about her, acrimonious or friendly discussion of her. If she failed to
set the pace in the sense alluded to by Molly Underhill, she set it in
the way of arousing unflagging talk. She had, always, so set it. She
was one of the women--lucky or unlucky, as one might consider them--who
are discussed. I wished immensely to hear the latest arguments for
and against her. I burned with curiosity, composed of friendship and
of that prying interest of the novelist, to know the details of her
marriage, which had taken place shortly after my departure for a stay
of two years in France. Not having returned to New York for the purpose
of finding out, today I realised that this was what I must find out.
It became a piece of news that New York withheld only to drop on my
head when I should be off my guard. The tales I was to hear would be
partisan tales; the truth was the brick held in reserve. For, odious
as I felt myself in wanting to know, I still feared to hear the truth.
That I was promptly to hear everything else was left in no doubt;
underlying the various invitations there was the projected weaving into
a whole piece of those vicarious hints, those veiled prognostications,
those omens of the future as read from the signposts of the immediate
past, that our friends had left behind their occasional European
travels. Authors do not write chatty letters to each other: they save
their lucubrations for the printed work; and what they had dropped in
the course of the necessarily hurried talk of casual encounters as we
drifted anchorless had not exposed what might be the trouble between
Eva Litchfield and Nicholas Van Suydam.

I said to myself: “Dinah Avery, my good woman, you had best furbish
your own ideas--your recollections--before swimming out to sea. For
swim out to sea you must, and will, before the day is over.” From the
thirtieth-floor windows of my small apartment I looked at the sky-line
whose fame was flashing around the world and was physically shocked:
had corresponding changes taken place in my friends? With that sky-line
assaulting my nerves it required no wide digression to speculate about
Eva’s husband: he was one of the rising young architects of the city,
and that the steel ribs of one or more monsters had been plucked from
the side of this Adam was probable. I recalled him as a handsome man
who lacked hardness of fibre. How could he bring about a drastic
change in Eva? Life failed to scratch the surface of her absorption in
her work. Her experiences were of the soul and not of the body. She
was capable of going through matrimony without experiencing with her
body the slightest nervous reaction. Her soul might be bruised and her
mind astounded, but no physical impression would have been made on
her; she would still show to the world, and even to those friends in
her confidence, a face almost nun-like in its essential purity. No man
could hurt Eva for all time, I reflected comfortably: and at once I
recalled the comment made on her by the caricaturist, Justo Zermonte.
Zermonte had said without apology what many men had suspected but
hesitated to acknowledge: Eva was a crystal, and a blow might leave her
unscratched while the next blow might strike on the line of cleavage
and shatter her.

As usual when she was being discussed, Spencer Mapes the essayist had
been eager; he had an insect-like persistence in stinging; but he might
have been as impersonally curious as Zermonte when he asked: “Where
would that blow have to strike--the shattering blow, I mean?”

According to a trick of his, Zermonte was sketching on the back of a
menu card and did not lift his eyes. He shrugged. Those human beings
whose lines of cleavage had been struck the shattering blow were more
vulnerable to caricature, and therefore more interesting to him, than
the unbroken Eva Litchfield; he could not understand the writer’s
desire to peel off the skins of the onion, for only the dreadful core
was in his line. But Spencer Mapes of the literary mind continued to
speculate; he seemed to buzz, when he so discussed his friends. “If
the crystal were to be heated?” he suggested. Zermonte regretted that,
not being a lapidary, he did not know. “I was wrong, of course,” Mapes
kept at it. “A crystal can’t be heated.”

Eva had sat looking at them while they so arranged her under a
microscope. She smiled with a faint amusement that could have been
genuine but that was merely her lovely indifferent agreement on a point
which failed to interest her; she had but a slight sense of humour.
Humour would have marred the delicacy of her feeling for beauty. She
tolerated no realism. Characteristically she suggested: “Why not have
said a diamond? The diamond is eternal.” Nicholas Van Suydam, indeed,
could not hurt her. She did not care whether her happiness were eternal
if only her work would be.

But Molly had said, “The look in her mother-in-law’s eye.” I felt as if
I were at the motion pictures, as if I were managing the picture; for
I cranked the projecting machine a little further and saw, clearly and
accurately, Nicholas Van Suydam’s mother as I had seen here in fact.

His publishers had given a tea to our favourite Englishman. The
entresol of the Savoy Plaza roared with our lifted voices, and
smelled of dying flowers, and occasionally someone paused long enough
absent-mindedly to eat a sandwich. Eva Litchfield had taken possession
of Nicholas Van Suydam and, as I recall, was in a less crowded room
talking with him. She had not captured him against his will; never
had I seen a young man so fatuously lifted above himself by a woman’s
notice. Eva was a delicate thistledown blowing across his path,
dazzling him, luring him. While I stayed, they did not again mingle
with the crowd. And Spencer Mapes lingered near the door through which
they had disappeared, leaning against the white woodwork with his own
handsome head thrown back--not brooding but waiting.

The Englishman stood decently to receive those invited to meet him and
no one wasted a minute on him. In a mild aside to those of us within
hearing, he said that it was very New York. He stood watching the
people who did not so much as glance at him because already they knew
how he looked. They were in perpetual motion. They drew together and
fell apart; and so quickly did they shift from group to group that
one got the impression of their never quite closing their lips: what
they had started to say in one group was continued in the next group
in which they found themselves. It is impossible to accost a scuttling
mouse: they dashed past the guest of honour with terrifying speed. The
noise of the conclave surged down the stairs; and such was the volume
of this concatenation that the elderly lady who now, with the most
beautiful suddenness, appeared at the head of the stairs must have had
to push against it as against material opposition. But this opposition
which was not consciously directed against her had had, evidently, the
effect of stiffening some as yet unrevealed resolution. Also, she might
have been upheld by many taffeta petticoats. She was alone but gave the
impression of being attended. And such was the security of her evident
faith in her impregnable position that, too shrewd not to perceive that
the crowd ignored her, she waved aside any discomfort arising from this
by her own sweeping condemnation of all that she saw. Her cold grey
eyes travelled from face to face, appraising with a complete and icy
detachment--no interest whatever in who it might be the orbit of whose
flight she chanced to observe.

Beyond a few curious glances, the milling crowd paid no attention
to her. From his far doorway, Spencer Mapes, however, stared with
absorption. James Pomeroy, adjusting his pince-nez, his fingers using
on its narrow black ribbon the tenderness of touch that he would use
on a rare old book, came up to say to the Englishman, “I saw her--on
her way here, although it didn’t occur to me that she could conceivably
be on the way here--driving uptown in a horse-drawn carriage!” But, at
one time or another, most people had seen her maroon brougham with a
red-faced coachman in a puce livery expertly handling a pair of bays.
She might be said to be the last of the old buildings now in process
of demolition. In a backwash formed by the elderly lady’s antagonistic
near presence, the small cluster of us stood staring. Novelists stare
because they never know when they will use a person as a character in a
story. They stare without blinking, making no excuse to the object of
their fixed regard; they are working a photographic memory. And here
was a middle-aged woman who declined to appear younger than she was. It
was a find. We examined her in unabashed glee.

On her own part, she looked at us and refused to see us. About her
there was something of the lone knight girded for the combat. Her
purpose was so definite that by it she was set aside from the people
who aimlessly charged past; she waited for an opponent upon whom the
eyes of her mind were already fixed. I think that we might have
talked about her at the top of our lungs and she would not have
stirred a muscle of her face, so bent was she on an exact aim. She
was a force which had surged in on us. We felt her presence. But I
got the impression that in spite of the opposition of her ignoring
quiescence she watched us. She feared something; and that she refused
to acknowledge the existence of this apprehension did not minimize it.
On some one issue she had staked a thing so big that she quailed at the
failure she had not yet in her soul acknowledged to be possible. Her
hands, in too-small white gloves, clasped each other so tightly that
the kid stretched, and drew, and bulged. But her face was composed--old
ivory in its hard finish. Her decorous feet, in high buttoned boots,
rested side by side, and it was evidently with an effort of her muscles
that she kept them so properly on the floor; for she was by now seated
on one of those dreadful hotel sofas that are slippery and are too
high. About her there was something charming, and something forbidding,
and through all, and arising from the cause of all, this emanation of
terror. I got the idea that she forbade us to approach her because of
this terror. But what that would touch her could we bring down on her?

Molly Underhill suggested: “She does look like a scared rat.” She
looked like nothing of the sort; her fear was not fear of the fight but
of what might cause the fight.

James Pomeroy said that he took his hat off to her. “I never before saw
such iron self-control. Do you notice that she doesn’t tap her foot on
the floor, as all women under stress do? For you’ll admit that she’s
under stress?”

The Englishman undertook to explain her: he also was analysing her for
future use. “I have an old aunt,” he began. “That generation of nice
old ladies had no use for their own sex. You notice that her attention
is riveted on Spencer Mapes? Oh--unobtrusively, delicately; but with
such passion of feeling!”

“Spence wouldn’t see her even if she were younger. We all
know--although we deny it, and can’t after all explain the
ramifications of it--that he has eyes for no one besides Eva
Litchfield. I’m not sure it’s love----” speculated Florence Quincy, who
did not care. This was an old question with us; none of us cared; but,
not necessarily with viciousness but with the greatest persistence, we
dissected Spencer Mapes’ intentions towards Eva.

The Englishman murmured that he intended making a virtue of his
necessity to know more of her. He approached the elderly lady and
enquired if there were something he could do for her. He was a
huge man with a kind pink-and-white face and a gasping voice. Her
own voice, when she replied, was dry as bone-dust, but she stated,
graciously enough, that she recognized him by his pictures. Severely
she added that she had thought the reception was given to him. And her
somewhat acrid amusement, when he replied that so he had been given to
understand, proved that her fear was not of the guests now hovering
near.

She said: “I came to get my son.” There was finality about her
announcement. In the same tone she might have said “I came to snatch my
son from hell fire.”

“Your son, then, is a writer?” the Englishman ventured.


